Add file based program tutorial (#47886)
dotnet/docs: docs/csharp/fundamentals/tutorials/file-based-programs.md

> ---

Author: I swept the other content I wrote for this feature as well. The correct product team term is "file-based app". I standardized on that everywhere.

```bash
chmod +x AsciiArt.cs
```

Then, add a `#!` directive as the first line of the `AsciiArt.cs` file:

```csharp
#!/usr/local/share/dotnet/dotnet run
```

The location of `dotnet` can be different on different unix installations. Use the command `whence dotnet` to local the `dotnet` host in your environment.

After making these two changes, you can run the program from the command line directly:

```bash
./AsciiArt.cs
```

If you prefer, you can remove the extension so you can type `./AsciiArt` instead. You can add the `#!` to your source file even if you use Windows. The Windows command line doesn't support `#!`, but the C# compiler allows that directive in file based programs on all platforms.

## Add features and NuGet packages to the program

Next, add a package that supports ASCII art, [Colorful.Console](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Colorful.Console). To add a package to a file based program, you use the `#:package` directive. Add the following directive after the `#!` directive in your AsciiArt.cs file:

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="ColorfulPackage":::

> [!IMPORTANT]
>

> > The version `1.2.15` was the latest version when this tutorial was last updated. If there's a newer version available, use the latest version to ensure you have the latest security packages.

Reviewer: Great point! It would be good to link to the package here (even though you did above) just because of the context. I think being direct is beneficial here too, especially for those that may not be familiar with not using an IDE to look up packages (since that probably doesn't work for file-based programs)

```suggestion
> The version `1.2.15` was the latest version of the `Colorful.Console` package when this tutorial was last updated. Check the package's [NuGet page](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Colorful.Console) for the latest version to ensure you use a package version with the latest security fixes.
```

Next, change the lines that call `Console.WriteLine` to use the `Colorful.Console.WriteAscii` method instead:

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="WriteAscii":::

> Run the program, and you see ASCII art output instead of echoed text. Next, let's add command line parsing. The current version writes each word as a different line of output. The command line arguments you add support two features:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the program, and you see ASCII art output instead of echoed text. Next, let's add command line parsing. The current version writes each word as a different line of output. The command line arguments you added support two features:
```

1. Quote multiple words that should be written on one line:

   ```dotnetcli
   AsciiArt.cs "This is line one" "This is another line" "This is the last line"
   ```

1. Add a `--delay` option to pause between each line:

   ```dotnetcli
   AsciiArt.cs --delay 1000
   ```

> Users should be able to use both together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users should be able to use both arguments together.
```

Most command line applications need to parse command line arguments to handle options, commands, and user input effectively. The [`System.CommandLine` library](../../../standard/commandline/index.md) provides comprehensive capabilities to handle commands, subcommands, options, and arguments, allowing you to concentrate on what your application does rather than the mechanics of parsing command line input.

The `System.CommandLine` library offers several key benefits:

> - Automatic help text generation and validation
> - Support for POSIX and Windows command-line conventions  
> - Built-in tab completion capabilities
> - Consistent parsing behavior across applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Automatic help text generation and validation.
- Support for POSIX and Windows command-line conventions.
- Built-in tab completion capabilities.
- Consistent parsing behavior across applications.
```

To add command line parsing capabilities, first add the `System.CommandLine` package. Add this directive after the existing package directive:

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="CommandLinePackage":::

> [!IMPORTANT]
>

> > The version `2.0.0-beta6` was the latest version when this tutorial was last updated. If there's a newer version available, use the latest version to ensure you have the latest security packages.

Reviewer: Same note as the previous package tip here.

Next, add the necessary using statements at the top of your file (after the `#!` and `#:package` directives):

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="Usings":::

Define the delay option and messages argument. In command-line applications, options typically begin with `--` (double dash) and can accept arguments. The `--delay` option accepts an integer argument that specifies the delay in milliseconds. The `messagesArgument` defines how any remaining tokens after options are parsed as text. Each token becomes a separate string in the array, but text can be quoted to include multiple words in one token. For example, `"This is one message"` becomes a single token, while `This is four tokens` becomes four separate tokens. Add the following code to create the <xref:System.CommandLine.Option`1?displayProperty=nameWithType> and <xref:System.CommandLine.Argument`1?displayProperty=nameWithType> objects to represent the command line option and argument:

> :::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="OptionArgument":::

Reviewer: This seems to fit the style of a procedure. DO THIS and then follow up with info about why and the code.. I feel like you want to do this but for some reason you didn't 😁 

-----

1. Define the delay option and messages argument. Add the following code to create the `CommandLine.Option` and `CommandLine.Argument` objects to represent the command line option and argument:

   :::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="OptionArgument":::

   In command-line applications, options typically begin with `--` (double dash) and can accept arguments. The `--delay` option accepts an integer argument that specifies the delay in milliseconds. The `messagesArgument` defines how any remaining tokens after options are parsed as text. Each token becomes a separate string in the array, but text can be quoted to include multiple words in one token. For example, `"This is one message"` becomes a single token, while `This is four tokens` becomes four separate tokens.

The preceding code defines the argument type for the `--delay` option, and that the arguments are an array of `string` values. This application has only one command, so you use the *root command*. Create a root command and configure it with the option and argument. Add the argument and option to the root command:

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="RootCommand":::

Next, add the code to parse the command line arguments and handle any errors. This code validates the command line arguments and stores parsed arguments in the <xref:System.CommandLine.ParseResult?displayProperty=nameWithType> object:

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="ParseAndValidate":::

The preceding code validates all command line arguments. If the validation fails, errors are written to the console, and the app exits.

## Use parsed command line results

> Now, finish the app to use the parsed options and write the output. First, define a record to hold the parsed options. File-based apps can include type declarations, like records. They must be after all top-level statements and local functions. Add a `record` declaration to store the messages and the delay option value:

Reviewer: I think it might good to mention class here to, simply because people may not be familiar with what a record is but they've probably heard of class. I don't think it needs extra explanation because it will look like a class and they should be able to pick it up.

```suggestion
Now, finish the app to use the parsed options and write the output. First, define a record to hold the parsed options. File-based apps can include type declarations, like records and classes. They must be after all top-level statements and local functions. Add a `record` declaration to store the messages and the delay option value:
```

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="WriteAscii":::

Finally, replace the `if` clause you wrote earlier with the following code to process the command line arguments and write the output:

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs" id="InvokeCommand":::

## Test the final application

Test the application by running several different commands. If you have trouble, here's the finished sample to compare with what you built:

:::code language="csharp" source="./snippets/file-based-programs/AsciiArt.cs":::

In this tutorial, you learned to build a file-based program, where you build the program in a single C# file. These programs don't use a project file, and can use the `#!` directive on unix systems. Learners can create these programs after trying our [online tutorials](../../tour-of-csharp/tutorials/hello-world.md) and before building larger project-based programs. File based programs are also a great platform for command line utilities.

> 

Reviewer: Considering the code is only around 65 lines of code (with the //snippet comments removed) you could add a section to the end with all the code as an example. If you want to do that you need to prep the file first. You can't just reference the entire file because it will contain the //snippet codes. Add a `// <all>` and `// </all>` snippet at the top and bottom of the file, respectively. Then reference the `all` snippet in the ::: code reference. This erases all of the other //snippet comments in the output.

Author: In the end, I copied the source file and trimmed the tags from one of them.
